#### Chapter 1 
---------------

Introduction
=============
Working with text is pretty common in Computer Systems. All
programs are written in plain text, many
configuration files are written in plain text. Also for
quick notes, plain text is far more quick and useful than
processed documents. Until and unless a document needs to be
presented in a well formatted way, we do not need heavy
processing of text. Also, it should be noted that, before
presentation of any information (in formats like Word Document, PDF,
Powerpoint Presentation etc.), user needs to
collect and store the information first in plain text, then only he
or she will be able to present it in desired format.

The usefulness of text editing led the way to have a text 
editor present in any OS. Like, Windows provides
Notepad.exe, Mac OS provides TextEdit, any version of 
Gnome based Linux provides GEdit and almost all the
\*nix systems by default provide vi editor or Vim (vi
improved) for editing text.

1.1 The importance of vi
------------------------
While there are many text editors available (both GUI-based
and text-Based), vi is pretty popular in the \*nix community.
The reasons behind this are the following -  
 1. The vi editor is standardized by POSIX, so any POSIX compliant
    system must have this editor. Thus it can be a life saver
    at times when you have to perform some text editing but you
    do not have any other option available to you.
 2. Also if you are connecting to other machine using ssh,
    no GUI based editor will work. So, vi can be used to
    edit files in remote systems as and when required.
 3. vi is extremely fast and runs on low resources.
 4. While using the vi editor, users need not use a mouse and there
    are very few control key combination required in vi.
    This saves a lot of time.
 5. As vi is available everywhere and many Unix/Linux users use this
    text editor, you can get plenty of help over the internet.
    So, day to day job becomes easier.  

Due to the reasons mentioned above, many programmers and
system administrators rely on the vi editor.

1.2 What this book covers
-------------------------
This book is mainly focused on the basic commands of vi
editor, which is available in any other improved version of
vi like vim, nvi, elvis etc. So, all the commands and
instructions available in the book will be applicable for
basic vi editor as well as any improved version of it.
This book does not contain any advanced feature which vim
or other feature-rich clone of vi editor provides. It leaves
the reader in a stage where he or she knows just enough for
basic text editing using vi. From there he or she can take 
it forward for performing complex editing tasks easily.

1.3 Who should read this book
-----------------------------
If you are thinking whether to read this book, please check
if you fall into either of the following categories -

 1. You just started using vi and are getting stuck at times
    and you need some help to get out of the situation.
 2. You had used vi editor previously but may be due to no
    use for long time you have forgotten many commands.
    In other words you need a quick refresher of vi editor.
 3. You are pretty enthusiastic about learning vi editor and
    as you read this book you are ready to open the terminal
    and actually edit some files to check how vi editor works.
 4. If you want to learn any vi editor clone (like nvi, vim
    and elvis). Though this book will not cover all details
    of a specific vi clone, it will be enough to grab the 
    basics and this book will leave you at a stage from where
    you can take it forward and learn any clone of vi.

1.4 Who should avoid this book
------------------------------
This book may dissatisfy you if - 
 1. You already know the basics of how to use vi editor
    or any of its clones.
 2. You are looking for a quick reference of all the vi
    commands.
 3. You want to learn vi editor and its usages by only 
    reading this book (and not doing anything in vi).

1.5 How to read this book
-------------------------
Open this book, in your favourite web browser and parallelly 
open vi editor in a terminal window or gvim (if you are 
running Windows). As you read through the chapters, you can 
experiment with the commands and instructions written in 
this book. Repeat the commands and practice until you are 
well familiar with the commands and it has become your second
nature to use them. Then move on to next chapter. Every chapter uses the concept of 
the previous one. So, it is not recommended to skip a chapter. Repeat the 
process until you have finished.
### 1.5.1 Prerequisite 
 1. Computer or tablet which has vi/vim/nvi/elvis editor
    installed. If you are on Windows and want to have
    vi, you can go for gvim. Google this phrase "gvim for
    windows".
 2. Reader should have knowledge on how to move between
    directories in command line and how to create
    directories using commands.
 3. Patience. It takes a lot of time to get familiar
    with all the controls of vi. But this actually pays 
    off in long run.

1.6 Feedback is important
-------------------------
This book is an ongoing project, if you find any mistake or
you have a suggestion please raise an issue [here](https://github.com/palash90/vi/issues). 
Your changes and suggestions may get into future releases.

1.7 Colophon
-------------
This book is written using VIM - Vi Improved 7.4 on a
Lenovo G50-70 laptop running Linux Mint 18.1 Cinnamon 64
bit and later moved to Ubuntu 19.04 64 bit. All the movements and operators have been tested in vi, nvi, vile and
vim editor.



<br />
<br />
<br />



