
### Chapter 6
--------------

Advanced Movements
==================
In the last 5 chapters we have covered the basic movements
and editing commands that you can perform using vi. In this
chapter we'll talk about some more movements which are a
little advance in nature. Here you will learn how to move
by screens, go to a particular line, adjust your screen for
viewing purpose etc. These will make your editing faster
than before. Remember, these all are movement commands. So,
all of them work in Normal mode.

6.1 Move by screens
-------------------
Earlier we have seen how to move by lines, characters, words
etc. Using these movements you can move anywhere in the
content but it takes time. Here we'll discuss how to move by
screens. That means, you can move one full or half screen at
a time or in other terms, you can scroll texts. 
The following are the ways to do that,

### 6.1.1 Forward one screen
If you have opened a very long text, which spans across
more than one screen and you are done editing with the first
screen, you have to move to the next screen. You can
move to the next screen by using `j`/`k` but that will take time.
The elegant and more popular way is to use shortcut.
vi editor assigns `Ctrl+F` combination to move forward one
screen. So, once you are done with first screen and hit
`Ctrl+F`, text in the screen gets replaced
with text from the next part of the file.
 
### 6.1.2 Backward one screen
In case, you want to go back and want to see what was there in the
earlier screen, you can use `Ctrl+B` combination. It
replaces the text in the screen with the previous chunk
of text.
 
### 6.1.3 Forward half screen
In times, it is convenient to have the last part of the
first screen to be visible while reading/editing the first part
of the second screen. In these cases, you can use `Ctrl+D`
combination. It will replace the first half of the
screen with text from the second half of the current screen and in
the second half of the screen will show the first half
of the next chunk.

### 6.1.4 Backward half screen
Like forward half screen, there is a backward version of
it as well, `Ctrl+U` replaces the first half of the screen
with the text from the last half of the last screen and
the last half of the screen will retain the text from
the first half of the current screen.
 
### 6.1.5 Scroll forward one line
Like whole screen, you can also scroll one line. `Ctrl+E`
works to scroll forward one line.

### 6.1.6 Scroll backward one line
Scrolling backward one line is achieved using  `Ctrl+Y`.

Try these scroll commands in Normal mode while using vi
editor. These are real time savers.

6.2 Moving within screen
------------------------
Scrolling is useful when you want to quickly move between
screens. But what about moving within a screen?  
vi also helps in that, you can move to the top, middle or
bottom of screen.  
`H`- moves the cursor to the top of the screen  
`M` - moves the cursor in the middle of the screen  
`L` - moves the cursor to the last line of the screen  

`H` and `L` can also work with a count. To move to the fourth
line from the top, you can use `4H`, it will move the cursor
to the fourth line from top. To move to 5 lines above the
bottom, you use `5L`.

6.3 Moving to a particular line
-------------------------------
If you want to move to a particular line, you can do so in
vi editor. This is quite useful for programmers who get
compiler errors in a particular line. To go to a particular
line, follow this pattern `nG`, where n is the line number
you want to jump to.  
For example, to go to line 12, we use `12G` or to go to line
5, we use `5G`. To go to the last line of the file, use `G`.
To know which line, you are in, use `Ctrl+G` combination. This
will show you file status information in the bottom of the
screen. There you can see the position of the cursor.

6.4 Adjusting the cursor
------------------------
Scrolling around the file, jumping to lines, moving within
screens moves the cursor heavily and sometimes this may be
inconvenient. To solve this you may want to reposition
the cursor acocording to your choice for editing purpose.
This can be done by `z` command.   
z has three positions to move the cursor to and scroll the
file accordingly.
```
z. - moves the current line to the middle of the screen and
     scroll text as required
z- - moves the current line to the end of the screen and
     scroll text as required
z<Enter> - moves the current line to the top of the  screen
           and scrolls accordingly
```
6.5 Some ex commands to help viewing
------------------------------------
At this point, it can be safely assumed that, you are pretty
much familiar with vi editor and you can do a lot of stuff
using vi editor, may be you already have started using vi in
your day to day editing needs. Now comes, a bunch of ex
commands which makes your editing a little more convenient.
While you have opened a file and navigating through it using
screen movement, line jump commands etc. In this case, it is
really convenient to see the line number the cursor is in.
You can use commands in ex mode to view line details of
file.
### 6.5.1 Line Number
Till now we have used ex commands to save files and/or
exit editor. Now we'll learn how to use ex commands to
change the behavior of the editor. These are also known
as configuration.
The first one to learn is 'set number' command. This
command shows line number before each line. To run this,
change the mode to ex mode by <Esc> or Ctrl+[ and then
press : then type 'set number' and hit <Enter> and in the
editor will show line number before each line. To stop
showing line number, use 'set nonumber' command in ex
mode.

### 6.5.2 Jump to line 
There are times when you need to move to a particular
line. This can be done using nG command where n
represents the line number you want to move to. But it 
can be done using ex commands as well. Depending on the
situation, you can use either. To move to a particular
line using ex commands, you can use :n command where n
represents the line number you want to move to. For 
example, if you type :15 while you are in command mode
it takes the cursor to line number 15.

### 6.5.3 View which line you are in
This is a variant of Ctrl+G command. This command will
tell you in which line you are in.
While in command mode, type :.= to find the current line
the cursor is in. This is not very common in use.

### 6.5.4 View total number of lines
This is also not common in use but yes, you can use it to
see total number of lines in the file. This command
originates from ex editor, which is line based editor. So
you can understand how much it was useful in the days of 
line editors.
The command to show total number of lines in the editor
is :=
Actually in vi Ctrl+G combination shows the combined
output of this command and the previous one.

6.6 Some more movements
-----------------------
Until now we have discussed a lot of movement commands. We are
only left with a few commands which we'll cover in this
section and conclude this chapter.
### 6.6.1 Moving by sentences
While you are working on a long text file, you may need
to move between sentences or paragraphs. You can use (
and ) to move between sentences. The ( command moves the
cursor to the beginning of the current or previous 
sentence while ) moves to the beginning of the next
sentence.

### 6.6.2 Moving by paragraphs
Working with long texts comes with a lot of maintenance
headache with it. So, you need powerful tools to move 
around the file. While moving by words, lines, screens and
sentences makes things easier, it is not sufficient. vi
editor thus comes with one more useful command which
moves cursor back and forth between paragraphs. You can 
use { and } to move between paragraphs. { command moves 
the cursor to the beginning of the current or previous
paragraph while } moves the cursor to the beginnig of the
next paragraph.

### 6.6.3 Moving by matching brackets
This movement is useful for programmers. This commands
move the cursor to the matching bracket. If the cursor 
is right now under a bracket (){}[] then typing % moves
the cursor to the matching pair of it. For example if the
cursor is below { then typing % will move the cursor to
the matching bracket, i.e } 

### 6.6.4 Moving to a particular column in line
Each character takes some place in the file. While we can
move by lines, we also have other choice to move by
columns in a line. Usually, a visible character takes one
column but for special characters like <tab>, takes more
than one. To move to particular column in a line, we use
n| command, where n represents the column number to move
to.

6.7 Summary
-----------
In this chapter, we have seen some advanced movements to
faciliatate our editing tasks. Remember that, most of these
if not all of these movement commands can be used in conjunction
with edit commands like d c and y. Once you are accustomed
with these advanced movement commands, you have a pretty big
editing toolset in your fingertips which you can employ to
ease your editing job.


