
### Chapter 7 
-------------

Advanced Vi
===========

Till now we have seen many movement and editing commands in Vi editor, which will make your day to day job easier. However, there are some more commands in vi editor, that you can employ to make your life  even easier.


7.1 Redraw
-----------

Vi is a shell based editor. Which means that, the visual interface is built on top of shell. So, while using vi editor on slow shell or slow and heavy network text streams or when vi opens a temporary buffer during usage of other shell command (`git commit` is a popular example), it is possible that vi shows some junk characters along with the buffer content. It confuses the user. This is a rare scenario these days but still possible. In such cases, you can use `Ctrl + L` key combination to redraw the screen with actual content, vi discards all garbage characters introduced by shell.

7.2 Search
-----------

Searching within text is very common in text editing. Vi editor provides some search commands that you can employ to quickly navigate to the location where the search character or pattern is present and search in forward and backward direction. The search also works with Regular Expression. So, if you want to search with a particular regular expression pattern, you can use this feature. Keep in mind while searching that, vi editor search is case sensitive. So, `D` and `d` are different and yields different search results.

### 7.2.1 Search for a pattern
Vi editor gives you flexibility to search for a pattern in the file. To use this feature, you need to be in normal mode. Press `Esc` twice to make sure you are in normal mode and press `/`. If you already searched something earlier, hitting `Enter` will repeat the same search. If there was no search pattern used earlier, you will see a message at the bottomm of your screen.  


If you want to start a new search, change to normal mode and type `/` and type the pattern you want to search and hit `Enter`, if there exists a pattern, the cursor will navigate to the start of the pattern. Otherwise, it will show a message that pattern could not be found. This command searches for the pattern in forward direction. So, it will find the next occurence of the pattern in the file. If the cursor is already at the last character of the file, then it wraps and starts the search from the start of the file.   

The search works in two directions, forward and backward. To go to the next occurence of the pattern, hit `n` and to go to the previous occurence, hit `N`.  

The `/` command searches for a pattern in forward direction by default. To find previous occurence, you need `N`. To ease the process, vi editor provided `?` command which searches for a pattern in backward direction, so you will see the previous occurence of the search pattern. To see the next occurence of the patten used in `?`, you need to type `N`.  

So searching of pattern works in different ways -

`/` works in forward direction and `n` shows the next occurence of search pattern in the file.  
`/` with `N` shows the previous occurence of search pattern in the file.  
`?` works in backward direction and `n` shows the previous occurence of search pattern in the file.   
`?` with `N` shows the next occurence of search pattern in the file.  

Like hitting `Enter` immediately after typing `/` repeats the last search in the forward direction, hitting `Enter` immediately after typing `?` repeats the last search in backward direction.  

 
### 7.2.2 Search for a character in a line
Searching for a pattern is useful and you can do many of the text search using this. Vi provides another useful find command to work with characters present in line. This feature works in normal mode.  

To search for a character in a line, place your cursor on a line and type `f` followed by the character you want to search in the line. If the specified character is present in the line, it will move to the location of the character otherwise, it will stay in its position. The search happens in forward direction by default. To find a character in the line in backward direction, type `F` followed by the search character.  


The last character search can be repeated with `;` in same direction as the search happened and `,` repeats the character serach in opposite direction.   

There is another variant of the search which finds the character and places the cursor just before it. This search takes place when you type `t` followed by the search character. The `T` on the other hand places the cursor just after the previous occurence of the search character. These two search commands can also be repeated with `;` and `,` command as before.  

### 7.2.3 Move to last context

While searching is a useful feature in vi, searching here and there and returning to the last position can be daunting task to perform, especially in case of large text files. Vi provides a useful feature to handle this scenario. Vi will remember the last location of the search that it performed and you can go to that location and move back to the last edit location, to use this feature, use ``` `` ``` in normal mode.    

